# IC – 301.6 Cohorting Guidelines

Before utilizing the grid below, first consider the following in cohorting patients:

- When cohorting needs arise, Standard Precautions patients should be cohorted first.
- If there are no more eligible Standard Precautions patients to cohort, only then should you use these guidelines to determine appropriate cohorting for Combined-Droplet patients.
- Testing strongly recommended before cohorting.
- Any new onset of symptoms would require the patient to be placed in a single room. Re-testing for COVID-19 is recommended.

# Combined-Droplet Precautions Cohorting

|Disease|When is it appropriate to cohort?|
|---|---|
|Respiratory symptoms, viral pathogen identified|Okay to cohort like illnesses if within approximately 3-5 days of onset of illness (example: two Flu A patients, two RSV patients) – including patients on AGPs|

# When is it NOT appropriate to cohort?

- Do not cohort one patient who just developed a URI with another patient who developed symptoms >7 days prior.
- Do not cohort immunocompromised patients with viral URI*
- Do not cohort patients with different species of Influenza (e.g. Influenza A and Influenza B)
- Patient in Combined-Eyewear during their isolation/quarantine period (reference Patient and Family Quarantine and Deisolation Reference Guide for details)
- Patient with parent/visitor who is symptomatic or has known COVID-19 (reference Patient and Family Quarantine and Deisolation Reference Guide for details)

*Once this document is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this document in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
# IC – 301.6 Cohorting Guidelines

|Disease|When is it appropriate to cohort?|When is it NOT appropriate to cohort?|
|---|---|---|
|Bacterial respiratory infections (strep throat, pneumonia, etc.)|Okay to cohort after 24 hours initiation of antibiotics – including patients on AGPs|- Do not cohort before infection successfully treated with antibiotics
- No identified viral respiratory infection or URI symptoms that are specific to a viral infection (e.g. runny nose, red eyes). Testing for viral URI is recommended.
|
|Respiratory symptoms, no testing/no organism identified|Okay to cohort like respiratory symptoms if within approximately 3-5 days of onset of illness (example: two bronchiolitic patients who developed symptoms close in time) - including patients on AGPs|- Do not cohort if respiratory symptoms clearly reflect different diseases (i.e. one patient with a severe croupy cough and one patient with mild rhinorrhea)
- Do not cohort immunocompromised patients with respiratory symptoms.*
- Patient in Combined-Eyewear during their isolation/quarantine period
- Patient with parent/visitor who is symptomatic or has known COVID-19
|

*Please consult with the medical team.

# Contact Precautions Cohorting

|Disease|When is it appropriate to cohort?|When is it NOT appropriate to cohort?|
|---|---|---|
|Any disease requiring Contact Precautions|N/a|Cohorting patients in Contact Precautions is not permitted|

*Once this document is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this document in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.