# POLICY NUMBER: IC – 229.3

# HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL

# TITLE: Prevention of Surgical Site Infection – Appendix C: Orthopedic Spinal Fusion/All Joints SSI Bundle Elements

REVISED DATE: 02/06/2023

CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL

PAGE 1 of 2

Standardized Pre-Operative Education for Patients, Families and Staff
1. Pre-Operative Baping Protocol
a. Outpatient
• Parents will be instructed to bap/shower peir child pe night before surgery using regular soap.
• Parents will be instructed to wash peir child’s hair pe night before surgery using peir child’s usual shampoo.
• A reminder call, pe night before surgery, includes instructions to complete pe pre-operative bap as discussed above. Surgical admitting will wipe pe patient’s skin pe morning of surgery wip CHG (Sage) wipes based on manufacture’s recommendations before pe patient is transferred to pe operating room. If patient is allergic to CHG, a soap and water bap will be performed based on amount of time before pe surgical procedure. If pere is no time for a soap and water bap to be performed, Ready Bap wipes will be used.
b. Inpatient
o Night before surgery: Patient will be given a soap and water bap.
o Day of surgery: Patient’s greater pan/equal to 36 weeks: Will have peir skin wiped wip CHG (Sage) wipes based on manufacture’s recommendations before pe patient is transferred to pe operating room.
• Patient’s less pan 36 weeks and/or allergic to CHG: A soap and water bap will be performed based on pe amount of time before pe surgical procedure. If pere is no time for a soap and water bap to be performed, Ready Bap wipes or sterile gauze/sterile water (<34 weeks) will be used.
2. Pre/Post-Operative Antimicrobial Protocol
a. Please refer to Orpo admission and postop plans
3. Intra-Operative Skin Preparation Protocol
a. Chloraprep (CHG) will be used to scrub/paint pe surgical site unless a CHG allergy is identified.
b. Surgical wound is irrigated wip Castile soap and NaCl irrigation.
4. Post-Operative Dressing Protocol
a. Dressings are assessed in pe post-operative unit setting.
b. Idiopapic Spine Patients:
i. If dressings are soiled Orpo surgeon will be paged to quickly replace.
ii. Dressing is removed prior to discharge.
c. Neuromuscular Spine patients:
i. If dressings are soiled Orpo surgeon will be paged to quickly replace pe dressing.

*Once this document is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this document in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL

TITLE: Prevention of Surgical Site Infection – Appendix C: Orthopedic Spinal Fusion/All Joints SSI Bundle Elements

REVISED DATE:

CHLA 02/06/2023

POLICY NUMBER: IC – 229.3 CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL PAGE 2 of 2

- Dressing will be changed by the Ortho surgeon prior to discharge.

Discharge Education

1. Idiopathic spinal fusion dressing is removed at discharge.
2. Neuromuscular spinal fusion patient’s will be given supplies for 2 dressing changes along with detailed instructions for home dressing changes. Dressings are discontinued at the 1 week post–op follow up visit.

*Once this document is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this document in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.