# USDA Food Safety Information

# Food Safety Facts

Basics for Handling Food Safely

Safe steps in food handling, cooking, and storage are essential to prevent foodborne illness. You can’t see, smell, or taste harmful bacteria that may cause illness. In every step of food preparation, follow the four steps of the Food Safe Families campaign to keep food safe:

- Clean - Wash hands and surfaces often.
- Separate - Don’t cross-contaminate.
- Cook - Cook to the right temperature.
- Chill - Refrigerate promptly.

Shopping

- Purchase refrigerated or frozen items after selecting your non-perishables.
- Never choose meat or poultry in packaging that is torn or leaking.
- Do not buy food past “Sell-By,” “Use-By,” or other expiration dates.

Preparation

- Always wash hands before and after handling food.
- Don’t cross-contaminate. Keep raw meat, poultry, fish, and their juices away from other food. After cutting raw meats, wash hands, cutting board, knife, and countertops with hot, soapy water.
- Marinate meat and poultry in a covered dish in the refrigerator.
- Sanitize cutting boards by using a solution of 1 teaspoon chlorine bleach in 1 quart of water.

Storage

- Always refrigerate perishable food within 2 hours--1 hour when the temperature is above 90 °F (32.2 ºC).
- Check the temperature of your refrigerator and freezer with an appliance thermometer. The refrigerator should be at 40 °F (4.4 ºC) or below and the freezer at 0 °F (-17.7 ºC) or below.
- Cook or freeze fresh poultry, fish, ground meats, and variety meats within 2 days; other beef, veal, lamb, or pork, within 3 to 5 days.
- Perishable food such as meat and poultry should be wrapped securely to maintain quality and to prevent meat juices from getting onto other food.
- To maintain quality when freezing meat and poultry in its original package, wrap the recommended for the freezer.
- Canned foods are safe indefinitely as long as they are not exposed to freezing temperatures, or temperatures above 90 °F (32.2 ºC). If the cans look ok, they are safe to use. Discard cans that are dented, rusted, or swollen. High-acid canned food (tomatoes, fruits) will keep their best quality for 12 to 18 months; low-acid canned food (meats, vegetables) for 2 to 5 years.

Thawing

- Refrigerator: The refrigerator allows slow, safe thawing. Make sure thawing meat and poultry juices do not drip onto other food.
- Cold Water: For faster thawing, place food in a leak-proof plastic bag. Submerge in cold tap water. Change the water every 30 minutes. Cook immediately after thawing.
- Microwave: Cook meat and poultry immediately after microwave thawing.

Cooking

Cook all raw beef, pork, lamb, and veal steaks, chops, and roasts to a minimum internal temperature of 145 °F (62.8 ºC) as measured with a food thermometer before removing meat from the heat source. For
# Basics for Safe Food Handling

Serving

- Hot food should be held at 140 °F (60 °C) or warmer.
- Cold food should be held at 40 °F (4.4 ºC) or colder.
- When serving food at a buffet, keep food hot with chafing dishes, slow cookers, and warming trays. Keep food cold by nesting dishes in bowls of ice or use small serving trays and replace them often.
- Perishable food should not be left out more than 2 hours at room temperature--1 hour when the temperature is above 90 °F (32.2 ºC).

# COLD STORAGE CHART

These short, but safe, time limits will help keep refrigerated food from spoiling or becoming dangerous to eat. Because freezing keeps food safe indefinitely, recommended storage times are for quality only.

|Product|Refrigerator 40 °F (4.4 ºC)|Freezer 0 °F(-17.7 ºC)|Product|Refrigerator 40 °F (4.4 ºC)|Freezer 0 °F(-17.7 ºC)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|EGGS| | |Luncheon meat| | |
|Fresh, in shell|3 to 5 weeks|Do not freeze|opened package|3 to 5 days|1 to 2 months|
|Raw yolks & whites|2 to 4 days|1 year|unopened package|2 weeks|1 to 2 months|
|Hard cooked|1 week|Does not freeze well|BACON & SAUSAGE| | |
|LIQUID PASTEURIZED EGGS, EGG SUBSTITUTES| | | | | |
|opened|3 days|Does not freeze well|Bacon|7 days|1 month|
|unopened|10 days|1 year|Sausage, raw — from chicken, turkey, pork, beef|1 to 2 days|1 to 2 months|
|Mayonnaise|2 months|Do not freeze| | | |
|FROZEN DINNERS & ENTREES| | | | | |
|Keep frozen until ready to heat| |3 to 4 months| | | |
|DELI & VACUUM-PACKED PRODUCTS| | | | | |
|Store-prepared (or homemade) egg, chicken, ham, tuna, & macaroni salads|3 to 5 days|Does not freeze well| | | |
|HOT DOGS & LUNCHEON MEATS| | | | | |
|Hot dogs| | | | | |
|opened package|1 week|1 to 2 months| | | |
|unopened package|2 weeks|1 to 2 months| | | |
|SUMMER SAUSAGE| | | | | |
|labeled “Keep Refrigerated”| | | | | |
|Opened|3 weeks|1 to 2 months| | | |
|Unopened|3 months|1 to 2 months| | | |
|HAM, CORNED BEEF| | | | | |
|Corned beef, in pouch with pickling juices|5 to 7 days|Drained, 1 month| | | |
|Ham, canned labeled “Keep Refrigerated”| | | | | |
|Opened|3 to 5 days|1 to 2 months| | | |
|Unopened|6 to 9 months|Do not freeze| | | |

Leftovers

- Discard any food left out at room temperature for more than 2 hours--1 hour if the temperature was above 90 °F (32.2 ºC).
- Place food into shallow containers and immediately put in the refrigerator or freezer for rapid cooling.
- Use cooked leftovers within 4 days.
- Reheat leftovers to 165 °F (73.9 °C).

Refreezing

Meat and poultry defrosted in the refrigerator may be refrozen before or after cooking. If thawed by other methods, cook before refreezing.

Food Safety Information
# Basics for Safe Food Handling

|Product|Refrigerator|Freezer|Product|Refrigerator|Freezer|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| |40 °F (4.4 ºC)|0 °F (-17.7 ºC)| |40 °F (4.4 ºC)|0 °F (-17.7 ºC)|
|HAM, FULLY COOKED|Vacuum sealed at plant, undated, unopened|2 weeks|COOKED MEAT LEFTOVERS|Gravy & meat broth|2 to 3 months|
| |Vacuum sealed at plant, dated, unopened|"Use-By" date on package|FRESH POULTRY| | |
|Whole| |7 days|Chicken or turkey, whole|1 to 2 days|1 year|
|Half| |3 to 5 days| | | |
|Slices| |3 to 4 days|Chicken or turkey, pieces|1 to 2 days|9 months|
|HAMBURGER, GROUND & STEW MEAT| | | | | |
|Hamburger & stew meat|1 to 2 days|3 to 4 months| | | |
|Ground turkey, veal, pork, lamb, & mixtures of them| | | | | |
|FRESH BEEF, VEAL, LAMB, PORK| | | | | |
|Steaks|3 to 5 days|6 to 12 months| | | |
|Chops|3 to 5 days|4 to 6 months| | | |
|Roasts|3 to 5 days|4 to 12 months| | | |
|Variety meats — tongue, liver, heart, kidneys, chitterlings|1 to 2 days|3 to 4 months| | | |
|Pre-stuffed, uncooked pork chops, lamb chops, or chicken breasts stuffed with dressing|1 day|Does not freeze well| | | |
|SOUPS & STEWS| | | | | |
|Vegetable or meat added Cooked meat & meat casseroles|3 to 4 days|2 to 3 months| | | |

Food Safety Questions? Call the USDA Meat & Poultry Hotline AskKaren.gov If you have a question about meat, poultry, or egg products, call the USDA Meat and Poultry Hotline toll free at 1-888-MPHotline (1-888-674-6854) Monday through Friday from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. ET (English or Spanish). Recorded food safety messages are available 24 hours a day. Check out the FSIS Web site at www.fsis.usda.gov. Mobile phone users m.askkaren.govPregunteleaKaren.gov

The USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. Revised August 2013

|Giblets|1 to 2 days|3 to 4 months|
|---|---|---|
|COOKED POULTRY LEFTOVERS| | |
|Fried chicken|3 to 4 days|4 months|
|Cooked poultry casseroles|3 to 4 days|4 to 6 months|
|Pieces, plain|3 to 4 days|4 months|
|Pieces covered with broth, gravy|3 to 4 days|6 months|
|Chicken nuggets, patties|3 to 4 days|1 to 3 months|
|OTHER COOKED LEFTOVERS| | |
|Pizza, cooked|3 to 4 days|1 to 2 months|
|Stuffing, cooked|3 to 4 days|1 month|

FSIS encourages the reprint and distribution of this publication for food safety education purposes. However, USDA symbols or logos may not be used separately to imply endorsement of a commercial product or service.

Send E-mail questions to MPHotline.fsis@usda.gov.