|PPE Required for Transmission-Based Precautions:|Standard|Contact|Combined Droplet|
|---|---|---|---|
|Private Room|No|Yes|Yes|
|Hand hygiene|Yes|Yes|Yes|
|Gloves|As needed1|Yes|Yes|
|Gown|As needed1|Yes|Yes|
|Mask|As needed|No|Surgical mask (N95 mask during high-hazard procedures2)|

Recommendations for Hand Hygiene, Donning & Doffing PPE for Transmission-Based Precautions:

Please note that these guidelines recommend donning gloves inside the patient room. Staff may also don gloves outside the patient room as long as they do not use their gloved hand to open the patient room door.

|Type of Isolation|Upon Entering the Room|Upon Leaving the Room|
|---|---|---|
|Standard Precautions|Upon entering the room, use the hand hygiene pump inside the room.|If PPE is necessary1, take off gown, gloves, mask carefully at doorway.|
|Contact Precautions|Put on gown outside room. Open patient room door, perform hand hygiene inside room, put on gloves inside room.|Take off gown and gloves carefully at doorway. Leave the room and use hand hygiene pump outside the door.|
|Contact + Precautions|Put on gown outside room. Open patient room door, perform hand hygiene inside room (hand sanitizer okay prior to touching patient), put on gloves inside room.|Take off gown and gloves carefully at doorway. Leave the room, immediately walk to closest sink and wash hands with soap and water.|

|Combined Airborne (+)|Combined Droplet (+)|Protective Isolation|Mask Isolation|
|---|---|---|---|
|Yes|Yes|Yes|Yes|
|Yes|Soap and water wash|Yes|Yes|
|Yes|Yes|Yes|No|
|Yes|Yes|Yes|No|
|N95 Mask (PAPR during high-hazard procedures2)|No|Surgical mask (N95 mask during high-hazard procedures2)|Surgical mask|

1 During procedures and patent care activities likely to generate splashes or sprays of blood, body fluids, secretions, and/or excretions

2 For more information about high-hazard procedures, see IC 800 Aerosol Transmissible Disease (ATD) Exposure Control Plan
# Combined-Droplet Precautions

Put on gown and mask outside room. Open patient room door, perform hand hygiene inside room, put on gloves inside room.
Take off gown, mask, and gloves carefully at doorway. Leave pe room and use hand hygiene pump outside pe door.

# Combined-Droplet + Precautions

Put on gown and mask outside room. Open patient room door, perform hand hygiene inside room (hand sanitizer okay prior to touching patient), put on gloves inside room.
Take off gown, gloves, and mask carefully at doorway. Leave pe room, immediately walk to closest sink and wash hands wip soap and water.

# Combined Airborne Precautions

Put on gown and N95 mask in anteroom. Open patient room door, perform hand hygiene inside patient room, put on gloves inside patient room.
Take off gloves, gown, and N95 mask in anteroom. Leave anteroom and perform hand hygiene outside pe anteroom.

# Mask Isolation Precautions

Put on mask outside room. Open patient room door, perform hand hygiene inside room.
Take off mask carefully at doorway. Leave pe room and use hand hygiene pump outside pe door.

# Protective Precautions

Put on gown and mask outside room. Open patient room door, perform hand hygiene inside room, put on gloves inside room.
Take off gown, mask, and gloves carefully at doorway. Leave pe room and use hand hygiene pump outside pe door.

See IC 220A Example of Safe Donning and Removal of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for more details on how to properly don and doff PPE.