# HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL

# TITLE: Playroom and Rehab Services Dishwasher Maintenance

ORIGINAL DATE: 6/13/2019 EFFECTIVE DATE: 09/03/2019 APPROVED BY: Chief Clinical Officer, Quality Improvement Committee and The Board of Directors

REVISED DATE:

POLICY NUMBER: IC – 224.2CHLA CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL PAGE 1 of 2

# PURPOSE:

This policy defines the use and maintenance of the dishwasher units within the playrooms and Rehab Services department. Dishwashers within the playroom and Rehab Services department are used to sanitize toys, supplies, and utensils used by the departments to ensure the control of infection and to maintain high standards of cleanliness.

# PROCEDURE:

Dishwashers will be operated and cleaned according to the Operating Instructions manual which can be found in the Child Life Sharepoint Site and online folder maintained by the Rehab Services Department.

Instructions include: Guide, Caring for the environment, Before using for the first time, Loading the dishwasher, Basket accessories/Use, Program Guide/Use, Additional options, Frequently asked questions, Comparison tests, After sales service, Transport, User Maintenance Instructions, Cleaning and care, Installation instructions, Electrical connection, and Plumbing.

Routine deep cleaning or maintenance will be conducted twice a year by staff assigned to work area of each dishwasher.

# Items not recommended for dishwasher include:

- Toys/Equipment with hollow interiors
- Toys/Equipment with electrical or battery operation
- Wooden toys/Supplies
- Cutlery with wooden handles
- Wooden cutting boards
- Glued items such as old knives with handles glued together around the shank of the blade
- Handmade craft items, antique, metal trimmed or decorative glassware
- Plastic items that are not heat resistant (thin plastic toys, containers)
- Copper, brass, tin, or aluminum
- Dishes with color painted over the glaze. These items may fade over time.
- Cast iron pots and pans
- No Personal Staff Items
- Nipples

# Items okay to place in Dishwasher include:

- “Dishwasher safe” glassware

*Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
# HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL

# TITLE: Playroom and Rehab Services Dishwasher Maintenance

ORIGINAL DATE: 6/13/2019 EFFECTIVE DATE: 09/03/2019

REVISED DATE:

POLICY NUMBER: IC – 224.2CHLA CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL

- Small items to be washed in net bag or plastic cages
- All other toys, equipment, and utensils

|Water Temperatures in degrees Fahrenheit:| | |
|---|---|---|
|Normal|Wash: 150| |
|Pots/Pans|Wash: 170|Rinse: 160|
|Economy|Wash: 130| |
|SaniWash|Wash: 170|Rinse: 150|
|Rinse/Hold Tap| | |
|Express Wash|Wash: 115|Rinse: 130|

Users to verify temperature with test strips once per week based on manufactured recommended use.

REFERENCES:

Miele Dishwasher (models G 1181 and G2181) Operating Instructions booklet

TechnicalService@mieleusa.com Phone: 800-999-1360 Fax: 888-586-8056

APPROVED BY: Chief Clinical Officer, Quality Improvement Committee and The Board of Directors

PAGE 2 of 2

*Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.