# Algorithm for Management of Measles Exposure

## 1. Identify Index Case:
- **Confirmed:**
  - If Measles IgM is detected in oral fluid or blood then confirm measles.
  - If isolation of measles virus or detection of RNA in clinical samples (e.g. blood, urine, conjunctival or nasopharyngeal secretions) is achieved then confirm measles.
  - If there is a fourfold or greater rise in Measles IgG in blood or a single high level then confirm measles.
- **Probable:**
  - If there is a high index of suspicion characterized by:
    - Fever ≥ 101.0°F
    - Cough, coryza, or conjunctivitis followed by a generalized rash ≥ 3 days
    - Unvaccinated or delayed vaccination history
    - History of international travel
    - Contact with foreign visitors
    - Possible exposure to a measles patient in the past 3 weeks
  - Then consider measles probable.

## 2. Is the Index Case Infectious?
- If the index case is within the infectious period (4 days prior to and 4 days after the onset of rash) then the case is infectious.
- If the patient is immunocompromised then consider them infectious for the entire course of illness.

## 3. Identify Exposed Contacts:
- If contacts include patients, employees, students, or visitors then identify who among them is susceptible.
- If contacts are <1 year old, immunocompromised, or non-immunized against measles then consider them susceptible.

## 4. Actions for Susceptible Contacts:
- If contacts are susceptible then monitor for symptoms and isolate in Airborne Precautions from day 5-21 after the last exposure.
- If active disease is present then impose appropriate work restrictions.
- **CHLA Team Members:**
  - If exposed and not given vaccine within 72 hours following exposure then remain off work for the incubation period (5-21 days).
  - If returning to work then employee contacts EHS for clearance.
- **Visitors:**
  - If exposed then limit or restrict hospital visitation for the incubation period.

## 5. Notifications:
- If a measles case is identified then notify Infection Control at Ext 15510.
- If after hours/holidays/weekends then contact ID physician on call and leave a message on the IC voicemail.
- If a measles case is identified then begin collecting names of exposed contacts.
- If after hours then contact LACDPH to report the case at (213) 240-7941.

## 6. Administer MMR or IGIV:
- If the first dose of MMR was received more than one month ago then give the second dose.
- If within 3 days of exposure (≥12 months) then administer MMR unless severely immunocompromised.
- If within 6 days of exposure then administer IGIV.
