# HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL

# TITLE: Surveillance and Reporting

ORIGINAL DATE: 01/01/2007 EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/22/2020 APPROVED BY: Chief Clinical Officer; Quality Improvement Committee, Board of Directors

REVISED DATE:

POLICY NUMBER: IC – 403.0CHLA CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL PAGE 1 of 3

# PURPOSE:

The purpose of an effective surveillance program is to systematically collect, analyze, and interpret data enabling the hospital to continuously assess, plan, implement and evaluate care and treatment practices. Timely dissemination of this data to those who need to know is an essential component of surveillance.

The primary goal of CHLA surveillance program is to improve patient outcomes by preventing or minimizing the risk of nosocomial infections and such non-infectious nosocomial events that adversely affect the morbidity and mortality of a high-risk pediatric patient population.

CHLA clinical focus is on secondary, tertiary and quaternary care of pediatric patients. The surveillance program, priority-directed and targeting high-risk neurosurgical procedures, cardiothoracic and orthopedic surgery, organ transplantation and critical care of pediatric and newborn patients, concentrates on the following epidemiologically significant issues:

1. All healpcare associated bloodstream infections (CLABSI) house-wide
2. All healpcare associated urinary capeter infections UTI (CAUTI) house wide.
3. Healpcare associated surgical site infections for select procedures pat are mandated for surveillance by California Department of Public Healp. Surgical sites for infections are followed for 30 or 90 days depending on pe NHSN procedure category.
4. All patients found to be colonized or infected wip multi drug resistant organisms including MRSA, VRE.
5. All healpcare associated COVID-19 infections.
6. All Clostridium difficile positive cases.
7. All patients found positive for VRE or MRSA in pe blood.
8. All patients found positive for Public Healp reportable diseases/ conditions.
9. All healpcare associated infections caused by organisms pat are epidemiologically significant in pe pediatric setting (e.g. VZV, RSV, rotaviruses, adenoviruses).
10. All healpcare associated aspergillosis cases in high risk patients, including Hem/Onc and BMT patients.

CHLA’s surveillance program is based on principles and definitions formulated by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and follow closely the model for epidemiologic studies created by the National Nosocomial Infection Survey (NNIS).

# Data Collection and Reporting

1. The Infection Prevention and Control staff seek pertinent information during review of patient

*Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
# HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL

# TITLE: Surveillance and Reporting

ORIGINAL DATE: 01/01/2007

EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/22/2020

APPROVED BY: Chief Clinical Officer; Quality Improvement Committee, Board of Directors

REVISED DATE:

POLICY NUMBER: IC – 403.0CHLA

CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL

PAGE 2 of 3

charts, daily rounds from nurses, physicians and other members of the health care team.

1. Whenever appropriate, known or suspected cases of infections identified by a clinician performing review of hospitalized patients will be referred to Infection Prevention and Control.
2. Post-discharge surgical site infections, whenever identified, may be referred to Infection Prevention and Control by the clinic following the patient or by retrospective positive wound culture review by the Infection Prevention team
3. Other sources of information are Community agencies such as Other Hospitals, Department of Public Health and Home Health Agencies
4. Tools of surveillance include but are not limited to daily review of microbiology reports, admissions line listing, O.R. schedule, Infection Prevention and Control worklist, Infection Prevention surveillance software, etc.

Outbreak investigations are described in more detail in IC 110.0 Outbreak Investigations. Once an outbreak is identified, Infection Prevention must report the outbreak to Los Angeles County Department of Public Health and California Department of Public Health, as established by local and state regulations.

1. Exposure investigations are described in more detail in IC 303.0 Communicable Disease Exposure. Follow-up of exposures to communicable diseases may be warranted, by hospital policy and/or Public Health regulations and State laws, whenever an exposure is suspected among:
- CHLA patient population
- Hospital personnel
- Visitors
- Pre-hospital Emergency Personnel

Investigation of Non-infectious events with significant impact on pediatric population may be required.

LA County Department of Public Health reportable cases are reported accordingly.

Data or cases which are required to be reported to the state are reported through NHSN.

Results of surveillance are analyzed, reported and discussed during Hospital Infection Prevention and Control meetings and disseminated to the respective units/ areas.

# REFERENCES:

1. NationalHealthcareSafetyNetwork.
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/hip/NNIS/members/nhsnsysreq.htm
2. Mayhall CG, Editor. Hospital Epidemiology and Infection Control, 3rd Ed. Baltimore, 2004.
3. APIC text of Infection Control and Epidemiology, Volume I, Fourth Edition: Surveillance, 2014.
4. IC - 110.0 Outbreak Investigations
5. IC - 303.0 Communicable Disease Exposure

*Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
# HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL

TITLE: Surveillance and Reporting

ORIGINAL DATE: 01/01/2007 EFFECTIVE DATE: 12/22/2020 APPROVED BY: Chief Clinical Officer; Quality Improvement Committee, Board of Directors

REVISED DATE:

POLICY NUMBER: IC – 403.0CHLA CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL PAGE 3 of 3

POLICY OWNER: Director, Accreditation & Licensing, Infection Prevention, and Emergency Management

*Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.