# FAQs (frequently asked questions) (Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus)“MRSA”

What is MRSA?
Staphylococcus aureus (pronounced staff-ill-oh-KOK-us AW-ree-us), or "Staph" is a very common germ that about 1 out of every 3 people have on their skin or in their nose. This germ does not cause any problems for most people who have it on their skin. But sometimes it can cause serious infections such as skin or wound infections, pneumonia, or infections of the blood.
Antibiotics are given to kill Staph germs when they cause infections. Some Staph are resistant, meaning they cannot be killed by some antibiotics. "Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus" or "MRSA" is a type of Staph that is resistant to some of the antibiotics that are often used to treat Staph infections.

Who is most likely to get an MRSA infection?
In the hospital, people who are more likely to get an MRSA infection are people who:

• have other health conditions making them sick

• have been in the hospital or a nursing home

• have been treated with antibiotics.

People who are healthy and who have not been in the hospital or a nursing home can also get MRSA infections. These infections usually involve the skin. More information about this type of MRSA infection, known as "community-associated MRSA" infection, is available from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). http://www.cdc.gov/mrsa

How do I get an MRSA infection?
People who have MRSA germs on their skin or who are infected with MRSA may be able to spread the germ to other people. MRSA can be passed on to bed linens, bed rails, bathroom fixtures, and medical equipment. It can spread to other people on contaminated equipment and on the hands of doctors, nurses, other healthcare providers and visitors.

Can MRSA infections be treated?
Yes, there are antibiotics that can kill MRSA germs. Some patients with MRSA abscesses may need surgery to drain the infection. Your healthcare provider will determine which treatments are best for you.

What are some of the things that hospitals are doing to prevent MRSA infections?
To prevent MRSA infections, doctors, nurses, and other healthcare providers:

• Clean their hands with soap and water or an alcohol-based hand rub before and after caring for every patient.

• Carefully clean hospital rooms and medical equipment.

• Use Contact Precautions when caring for patients with MRSA. Contact Precautions mean:

o Whenever possible, patients with MRSA will have a single room or will share a room only with someone else who also has MRSA.

o Healthcare providers will put on gloves and wear a gown over their clothing while taking care of patients with MRSA.

Co-sponsored by: 3non GIDSA HE APIC American Association Hospital The Joint Commission