# HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL

# TITLE: Playroom and Group Setting Attendance

ORIGINAL DATE: 05/01/2013 EFFECTIVE DATE: 05/25/2023 APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical Executive Committee, Board of Directors

REVISED DATE: CHLA 04/08/2023 POLICY NUMBER: IC – 829.0 CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL Page 1 of 4

# PURPOSE:

To ensure safe attendance during group settings within patient care areas, to prevent the spread of infectious organisms and to promote an overall safe therapeutic environment for patients, personnel, and visitors at Children’s Hospital Los Angeles.

# SCOPE:

This policy is applicable to all CHLA team members in the inpatient areas.

# DEFINITION:

Patient Care Areas are identified as shared space for a group activity or event. Patient care areas include but are not limited to, Playrooms, Teen Lounge, and Multi-Use Rooms (MUR)

|Playrooms|A supervised space for patients and visitors of all ages|
|---|---|
|Multi-Use Rooms (MUR)|MUR is used for (but not limited to) school, Literally Healing reading activities, and supervised Child Life activities for patients and visitors|
|Teen Lounge|A supervised space for adolescent patients and visitors (12 and up)|

This policy does not apply to outpatient areas

# PROCEDURE:

Factors guiding playroom attendance

1. Isolation Status
- Patients in Standard Precautions are permitted to attend playrooms.
- Patients on Transmission-Based Precautions are not permitted to attend playrooms (see CHLA Policy IC – 301.0 Isolation Precautions for more information).
2. Medical Stability
- Patients who are medically stable and do not require continuous observation by licensed HCP
- Patients with PCA pumps are permitted to attend as long as there is a hospital staff or family member over the age of 16 accompanying during transport and the bedside R.N. contact number is available (See PC – 056.1 Transport Pyramid for more details)

*Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
# HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL

# TITLE: Playroom and Group Setting Attendance

ORIGINAL DATE: 05/01/2013

EFFECTIVE DATE: 05/25/2023

APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical Executive Committee, Board of Directors

REVISED DATE: CHLA 04/08/2023

POLICY NUMBER: IC – 829.0

CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL

Page 2 of 4

c. Patients who are on portable telemetry are permitted to attend peir unit based playroom unless explicitly ordered by provider to be off telemetry when leaving pe floor
d. Patients on a ventricular assisted device (VAD) can attend CV Acute Playroom wip physician consent. (R.N. and one additional staff person must be present wip patient)
e. Patients receiving continuous chemo and/or blood product transfusions must stay on peir respective unit to ensure proper monitoring

# 3. Transplant Populations

a. Eligibility of transplant patients to attend playrooms or multi-use rooms will be managed and communicated to pe individuals staffing pe rooms by pe Child Life specialist assigned to pe service.
b. Renal transplant patients may not attend playrooms unless approved by pe Kidney Transplant team.
c. Liver and intestinal transplant patients may attend playrooms if pey meet pe following criteria:

i. Patients > 3 monps post-transplant wip ANC >500 and on Standard Precautions
ii. Patients are not permitted to attend playroom if pey meet pe following criteria:

1. Intestinal transplant recipients < 3 monps post- transplant (pis includes new transplants and re-admissions).
2. New liver and Intestinal transplant recipients who have not been discharged from pe hospital for pe first time.
3. Liver and intestinal transplant recipients actively being treated for rejection wip IV corticosteroids and/or a biologic agent for pe lengp of peir admission.
4. Liver and intestinal transplant recipients being treated for PTLD or oper complication requiring biologic perapy for pe lengp of peir admission.
5. Liver and intestinal transplant recipients wip ANC < 500.
6. Patients in acute liver failure being evaluated for liver transplantation.
7. Patients who are listed for liver transplant as 1A or 1B status.

d. Pre-cardiac transplant patients are permitted to attend individual (1:1) session in CV Acute Playroom.
e. Post-cardiac transplant patients are not permitted to attend unless explicitly cleared by cardiac transplant physician.

# 4. Visitor Guidelines

a. Visitors of patients permitted to attend playroom may attend playroom.
b. If patients are not permitted to attend playroom due to medical instability, peir visitors will be allowed to visit playroom.

*Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
# HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL

# TITLE: Playroom and Group Setting Attendance

ORIGINAL DATE: 05/01/2013

EFFECTIVE DATE: 05/25/2023

APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical Executive Committee, Board of Directors

REVISED DATE: 04/08/2023

CHLA POLICY NUMBER: IC – 829.0

CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL

Page 3 of 4

# Unit Guidelines

a. Patients and visitors may only attend pe playroom located on peir own patient unit (except MUR, Teen Lounge, PICU and NICCU)
b. BMT patients are not permitted to attend playrooms or Multi-Use Rooms.
c. Patients on Duque 5 and Duque 6 inpatient units are permitted to attend MURs in Anderson Pavilion if pey are on Standard Precautions.

# Other Guidelines

a. Patients pree years or younger must be accompanied by a parent or caregiver when attending playrooms or MURs.
b. Patients wip seizures must be accompanied by a parent or caregiver when attending playrooms or MURs.
c. Caregivers must be present on pe unit if pe sibling/visitor is participating in pe playroom (except Teen Lounge and siblings visiting NICCU and PICU).

# Guidelines for Infectious Disease Outbreaks and Pandemics

a. During Phase I of outbreaks and pandemics, all playrooms and MURs should be closed.
b. During Phase II of outbreaks and pandemics:
i. Playrooms and MURs may be reopened wip limited capacity. Safe capacity for each playroom and MUR to be determined and posted by pe Child Life team.
ii. Only COVID negative patients may attend playrooms and MURs.
iii. One caregiver will be allowed per patient. Siblings will not be allowed in playrooms.
iv. Capacity will be determined by pe size of pe playroom and pe ability for patients to maintain physical distancing (minimum 6 feet) from oper patients.
v. Use of playroom toys may be limited to reduce pe risk of cross-contamination. No toys or oper equipment should be shared between patients unless disinfected by CHLA staff or badged volunteers.
vi. All staff, visitors, and patients (when developmentally appropriate) must wear a mask at all times in pe playroom or MUR.

# Exceptions

Please consult with Child Life or appropriate medical team for exceptions.

*Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
# HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL

TITLE: Playroom and Group Setting Attendance

ORIGINAL DATE: 05/01/2013 EFFECTIVE DATE: 05/25/2023 APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Medical Executive Committee, Board of Directors

REVISED DATE: 04/08/2023

CHLA POLICY NUMBER: IC – 829.0 CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL Page 4 of 4

# REFERENCES:

1. PC – 056.1 Transport Pyramid
2. IC – 301.0 Isolation Precautions

POLICY OWNER: Director, Accreditation, Infection Prevention and Control, and Emergency Management

*Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.