# FAQs about "Clostridium Difficile"

What is Clostridium difficile infection?

Clostridium difficile [pronounced Klo-STRID-ee-um dif-uh-SEEL], also known as "C. diff" [See-dif], is a germ that can cause diarrhea. Most cases of C. diff infection occur in patients taking antibiotics. The most common symptoms of a C. diff infection include:

- Watery diarrhea
- Fever
- Loss of appetite
- Nausea
- Belly pain and tenderness

Who is most likely to get C. diff infection?

The elderly and people with certain medical problems have the greatest chance of getting C. diff. C. diff spores can live outside the human body for a very long time and may be found on things in the environment such as bed linens, bed rails, bathroom fixtures, and medical equipment. C. diff infection can spread from person-to-person on contaminated equipment and on the hands of doctors, nurses, other healthcare providers and visitors.

Can C. diff infection be treated?

Yes, there are antibiotics that can be used to treat C. diff. In some severe cases, a person might have to have surgery to remove the infected part of the intestines. This surgery is needed in only 1 or 2 out of every 100 persons with C. diff.

What are some of the things that hospitals are doing to prevent C. diff infections?

- To prevent C. diff. infections, doctors, nurses, and other healthcare providers:

- Clean their hands with soap and water or an alcohol-based hand rub before and after caring for every patient. This can prevent C. diff and other germs from being passed from one patient to another on their hands.
- Carefully clean hospital rooms and medical equipment that have been used for patients with C. diff.
- Use Contact Precautions to prevent C. diff from spreading to other patients. Contact Precautions mean:

- Whenever possible, patients with C. diff will have a single room or share a room only with someone else who also has C. diff.
- Healthcare providers will put on gloves and wear a gown over their clothing while taking care of patients with C. diff.
- Visitors may also be asked to wear a gown and gloves.
- When leaving the room, hospital providers and visitors remove their gown and gloves and clean their hands.

Co-sponsored by: GIDSA, APIC, American Hospital Association, The Joint Commission