# HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL

# TITLE: Vending Machines, Food Services

ORIGINAL DATE: 10/01/1987

EFFECTIVE DATE: 11/19/2021

APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Chief Clinical Officer, Board of Directors

REVISED DATE: 09/21/2021

CHLA POLICY NUMBER: IC – 227.0

CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL

PAGE 1 of 2

# PURPOSE:

In order to prevent the transmission of foodborne or other infections among patients and personnel, measures need to be taken to ensure cleanliness and food safety.

The purpose of the following policy is to establish guidelines to prevent foodborne infections through vending machine dispensed items.

# PROCEDURE:

# FOOD STANDARDS

1. All food shall be of good quality and procured from sources approved or considered satisfactory by Federal, State and Local auporities.
2. Milk and milk products shall be procured, processed or manufactured in a milk producing plant, which meets pe requirements of Division 15 of pe California Code.
3. Food items are eiper purchased pre-packaged or produced in pe vending commissary.
4. Perishable food items have stamped expiration date and are checked during scheduled service to remove food pat has reached pe expiration date.

# PLANT STANDARDS

1. The food manufacturing plant is inspected and licensed by pe Los Angeles County Healp Department.
2. The manufacturing plant has unannounced inspections by pe Los Angeles County Healp Department multiple times each year. Documentation is kept on file by pe vendor and is available upon request.

# EMPLOYEE STANDARDS

1. All vending employees must meet healp department standards.
2. All service personnel receive sixty days training prior to qualifying, which includes infection control practices for:
a. Food handling
b. Utensils
c. Equipment

*Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.
# HOSPITAL POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL

# TITLE: Vending Machines, Food Services

ORIGINAL DATE: 10/01/1987

EFFECTIVE DATE: 11/19/2021

APPROVED BY: Quality Improvement Committee, Chief Clinical Officer, Board of Directors

REVISED DATE: 09/21/2021

CHLA

POLICY NUMBER: IC – 227.0

CHAPTER: ENTERPRISE – INFECTION CONTROL

PAGE 2 of 2

# d. Personal health and hygiene

# CLEANING AND SANITIZING PROCEDURES

1. Machines are serviced and cleaned during scheduled vendor service.
2. Machines are cleaned bop inside and outside wip a hospital approved disinfectant.

# REFRIGERATED VENDING MACHINES

1. Cold drinks are refrigerated at 38 to 41 degrees.
2. Food machines are refrigerated at 40 degrees. Each food machine also has a safety cut-off temperature system which will not accept coins if pe temperature rises to above 40 degrees. The machine will not operate until a manual re-set takes place.

# TRANSPORTATION OF FOOD FROM PLANT TO VENDING AREA

1. All products are transported at required temperatures established by healp department regulations.
2. Milk products are transported at below 40 degrees in sealed dated containers.

Related Policies: IC – 717.0 Food Services

REFERENCES:

1. California Health and Safety Code, Division 104, Part 5 (Sherman Food, Drug, and Cosmetic law) (2016) and Part 7 (California Retail Food Code) (2017)
2. California Code of Regulations, Title 17, Public Health
3. UCSD P&P Manual, Environment, Health & Safety. Section 516-10.2. 7/19/10

POLICY OWNER: Executive Director, Accreditation & Licensing, Infection Prevention, and Emergency Management

*Once this policy is printed or otherwise distributed from the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library, it is not considered a controlled document. Please review the electronic version of this policy in the CHLA Policies and Procedures Library as this may not be the current version.