# IC – 825.2 Attachment B VRE Facts for Families

What is VRE (vancomycin-resistant enterococci)?

Enterococci are bacteria that are normally present in the human intestines and in the female genital tract and are often found in the environment. These bacteria can sometimes cause infections. Vancomycin is an antibiotic that is often used to treat infections caused by enterococci. In some instances, enterococci have become resistant to this drug and thus are called vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE). Most VRE infections occur in hospitals.

What types of infections does VRE cause?

VRE can live in the human intestines and female genital tract without causing disease. However, sometimes, it can be the cause of urinary track infections, blood stream infections and wound infections.

Are certain people at risk of getting VRE?

- Persons who have been previously treated with vancomycin and combinations of other antibiotics such as penicillin and gentamicin
- Persons who are hospitalized, particularly when they receive antibiotic treatment for long periods of time
- Persons with weakened immune systems such as patients in Intensive Care Units, or in cancer or transplant wards
- Persons who have undergone surgical procedures such as abdominal or chest surgery
- Persons with medical devices that stay in for some time such as urinary catheters or central intravenous catheters

How common is VRE?

VRE was not reported in U.S. hospitals until 1989. Data reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention during 2004 showed that VRE caused about 1 of every 3 infections in hospital intensive care units.

What is the treatment for VRE?

Most VRE infections can be treated with antibiotics other than vancomycin. The treatment of VRE is determined by laboratory testing to determine which antibiotics are effective. For persons who get VRE infections and have urinary catheters, removal of the catheter when it is no longer needed can help getting rid of the infection. People who are colonized (bacteria are present, but have no symptoms of an infection) with VRE do not usually need treatment.

How is VRE spread?

VRE is usually passed to others by direct contact with stool, urine or blood containing VRE. It can also be spread indirectly via the hands of healthcare providers or on contaminated environmental surfaces. VRE usually is not spread through casual contact such as touching or hugging. VRE is not spread through the air by coughing or sneezing.
How can I prevent the spread of VRE?

- If you or someone in your household has VRE, the following are some measures to prevent spread of VRE:
- Always wash your hands thoroughly after using the bathroom and before preparing food. Clean your hands after close contact with persons who have VRE. Wash with soap and water (particularly when visibly soiled) or clean with alcohol-based hand cleaner.
- Frequently clean areas of your home such as your bathroom that may become contaminated with VRE. Use a household disinfectant or a mixture of one-fourth cup bleach and one quart of water to clean those areas and surfaces that are touched frequently.
- Wear gloves if you may come in contact with body fluids that may contain VRE, such as stool. Always wash your hands after removing gloves.
- Be sure to tell any healthcare providers that you have VRE so that they are aware of your infection.

What should I do if I think I have VRE?

Talk with your healthcare provider and get medical care if you think you have VRE.

http://www.cdc.gov/HAI/organisms/vre/vre.html