# IC - 301.4 Appendix F: Contact Isolation and Infection Prevention Protocol in ASC

Eligible Patient(s):

Only patients with orders for Contact Isolation are eligible for this protocol.

Patients requiring Contact +, Combined-Droplet, Combined-Droplet +, and Combined-Airborne Isolation are not eligible for this protocol.

Patient bed assignment:

A patient requiring Contact Isolation may be treated in an ASC Operating Room and recovered in the ASC PACU.

Patient(s) who required Contact Isolation must be assigned to one of two designated bed spaces in ASC PACU.

The designated privacy screen must be used to separate the patient bed space from the adjoining bed space.

A privacy curtain may be drawn at the foot of the patient bed space if needed.

A maximum of 2 isolated patients may be cared for in the ASC PACU at any time.

ASC Charge Nurse will prioritize scheduling of isolated patients either at the beginning or the end of the day.

Personal Protective Equipment:

All staff must follow PPE required for Contact Isolation during each patient encounter including transport of patient to ASC PACU bed space

- Gown
- Gloves

Hand Hygiene:

Hand Hygiene in compliance with the World Health Organization (WHO) 5 Moments is required per policy IC 212: Hand Hygiene

Parents or visitors at the bedside of the patient must be instructed in proper hand hygiene with specific focus on performing hand hygiene after touching the patient or surroundings when leaving the bed space. Parents or visitors at the bedside must be shown the nearest alcohol-based hand sanitizer dispenser and sink space to utilize for hand hygiene.
IC - 301.4 Appendix F: Contact Isolation and Infection Prevention Protocol in ASC

Cleaning and Disinfection:
ASC Operating Room
Upon completion of pe procedure in pe ASC OR and transport of patient out of pe room to pe ASC PACU, staff wip perform in between case cleaning and disinfection in accordance wip Main Operating Room protocol utilizing hospital approved disinfectant wipes or solution wip attention to high touch surfaces including but not limited to hand rails, mattresses, and IV poles.
Anespesia techs are responsible for cleaning anespesia carts and machines in between cases using hospital approved disinfectant wipes or solution.
ASC PACU
Following discharge of pe patient from pe ASC PACU bed space pe bed space must be stripped of all linens and disposable items pen disinfected using hospital approved disinfectant wipes or solution wip attention to high touch surfaces including but not limited to hand rails, mattresses, and IV poles
All reusable non-critical patient equipment (IV pumps, monitors, and poles) must be cleaned in accordance wip manufacturer guidelines wip hospital approved disinfectant wipes or solution before use on pe next patient.
Privacy screen must be cleaned and disinfected wip hospital approved disinfectant wipes or solution before use on pe next patient.
Privacy curtains must be sprayed wip Clorox Hydrogen Peroxide spray after each patient.
All privacy curtains in pe ASC PACU must be removed/replaced and sent for laundering weekly.